you've all had a good nap and you're
ready to learn about the great new
features we've added to the window
manager and the menu manager to make
your applications look great on Mac OS
10 and to introduce you to all that
groovy new stuff let me bring out the
manager of the high level toolbox team
ed Bose right that's me
all right so the window when the many
managers are actually pretty important
to every car of an application you need
windows you need menus so what we're
planning to do in this session is kind
of lead you through an overview of all
the different things that we've added to
the carbon window and menu managers
here's a list on this slide but we're
gonna hit each one of the points
individually first sheets sheets are one
of the most visible features of aqua and
one of those features which you actually
need to adopt it doesn't come for free
the whole point of a sheet is to provide
a document model experience this means
that the sheet makes the document that
the sheet is bound to go modal the user
can't interact with the document any
longer they must interact with the sheet
instead but the user can still deal with
other documents other windows and the
rest of your application in general to
get sheets the easy way we have a few
api's the first is called create
standard sheet and if you're familiar
with standard alert or create standard
alert this is the equivalent in the
world of sheets you can also get sheets
for free through navigation services and
print panels bypassing the appropriate
parameters to the calls and that in
those two components or you can create
sheets yourself to do that you have to
create a window of Kay sheet window
class and this is actually enforced by
the window manager once you have this
sheet you should install a carbon event
handler to handle the kay event window
draw content event this is important
because we actually need to render the
content before we put the sheet on
screen because we need to do the
animation so all the bits need to be in
place before we can run that animation
so it's important to install that
handler
once you have your sheet and you've
installed your handler you probably want
to see it on screen and the easy way to
do that is just call show sheet window
and that API basically takes the parent
window that you want to bind the sheet
to and when you call this function we do
the animation we make the sheet appear
and the carbon event model then knows oh
we're in a sheet mode
document moodle situation and it knows
how to deal with clicks appropriately
once you're done with the sheet user is
interacted with it you call hide sheet
window we will do the inverse animation
make the sheet kind of get sucked back
up into the title bar and then you have
to remember that once you've hidden it
it's just hidden it still exists you
still need to dispose that window
transparent sheets are actually part of
the human interface guidelines you're
actually supposed to be able to see
through sheets now that's supported in
cocoa and the first release of Mac OS 10
but not in carbon but it is something
we're working on and I'm just making you
aware of this because there's a few
rules that you should follow in order
for us to try to turn this feature on
for free in most situations in general
you will probably need to switch this on
manually however for api's like create
standard sheet we want to be able to
turn this on and just have it work for
free so you don't have to do anything
you get all the benefits of transparent
sheets but in order to do that we
actually have to make changes to the
control manager as you know the control
manager likes to erase behind controls
and this presents problems because when
we erase we use quick draw and quick
draw does not deal with alpha and
transparency means alpha so it did have
to make some changes there so the goal
is that create standard sheet will just
work however create standard sheet
actually returns to dialogue ref to you
and at that point you can actually take
that dialogue rapid start inserting
dialogue items so that may actually work
against the goal of us being able to
turn it on automatically so what we ask
is that if you are going to do that make
sure you should add standard controls
cuz all of the standard controls that
are supplied by the toolbox will
automatically work in this new
transparent sheet mode and if you're
running custom controls be aware that
because sheets of transparent alpha that
whole thing you will have you will have
to actually render your controls with
core graphics courts and not quick-draw
so historically we've supported three
types of people of an alert the note the
caution and the stop alert you'll notice
on Mac OS 10 now when you call these
api's or specify these types of alerts
you actually don't see the correct icon
at the very least you should see the
caution icon that's part of our human
interface guidelines we are working on
fixing that and doing the right thing so
it's important for your applications to
not try to replace the icon yourselves
just keep using the constants as you
always have and we'll do the right thing
in a future release window groups are a
brand-new feature to the window manager
historically people have done many evil
things with the window manager by
manipulating the window list themselves
doing things that would probably scare
your grandmother so the problem with
that isn't that they were really doing
anything evil the problem was that the
toolbox couldn't actually rely on what
it thought the correct state was so in
carbon we actually want to be able to
have both the tool box and your
application play in the same sandbox and
always know the correct state so it
allows you to actually change window
layering it also allows you to change
the way you do at a window activation
but the most important thing is that the
toolbox is still in the loop and we can
we can always we can continue to do the
right thing for example if you click on
a applications icon in the dock up comes
a pop-up menu and then that pop-up menu
is a list of all the document windows
well we need to be able to just call
select window on that window or activate
window and have it actually do something
correct that your application can deal
with and we don't trip up your
application so one of the most common
uses for window groups is to actually
move windows between groups and in
you can actually think of groups as
layers so we have a document layer we
have a floating window layer we have
like a modal layer there are times when
applications want to take a document
window and make it float or make a
floating window not float and you could
do that through the window group API
actually if you were here yesterday for
the carbon event talk we showed an
application called magnify and part of
the Preferences there was a checkbox to
allow the window to actually float above
all windows or just be a floating window
in that application and the way that we
actually make that switch is to the
window groups so that's one aspect of it
the other aspect is the activation
aspect there are actually times and in
certain applications where they want to
make a window active and that window is
not the frontmost window to accommodate
this you've implemented a new API called
activate window this basically does the
mechanics of select select window yeah
select window and that it actually posts
and activate event to the window but it
doesn't actually change the see order so
it will deactivate whatever the
currently active window is and make the
window that you specify active to go
along with that we have active non
floating window this is what you should
probably use in place of front non
floating window or front window in fact
it's actually a bad thing to just use
front window at all unless you really
really know what you're doing and you
know how to walk through the window list
there may be times when the system has
windows in your window lists like for
example an input method has a window up
and if you call front window you're not
going to get your document window you're
gonna end up getting the input method
window so you need to be able to code in
such a way that you can deal with these
situations
and one of the best parts about window
groups is that you can create your own
you can create your own group put your
windows in it and then you can actually
do interesting things like make them
move together or Z order together so
treat them in almost as one window
sheets actually use this so when the
sheet is bound to its document window it
creates a window group and then that
pairing of windows acts as one when you
move the parent the sheet moves with it
when you click on one or the other
window
they both come forward or they both go
backward overlay windows are our
solution to be to allow you to actually
draw on the screen but you're really not
drawing on the screen what you're
drawing into is a transparent window at
a very high window level meaning that it
is above the menu bar and above the dock
now this is really cool I could draw a
little screen that's great but it does
have its implications for one a window
that is the size of the screen at 32-bit
on a 10 by 7 display is going to take 3
Meg just because you can't see it
doesn't mean it doesn't exist we
actually have a back buffer for it so
it's important to actually size your
windows appropriately for whatever
you're doing
it also requires core graphics to do
your drawing again quick-draw doesn't
deal well with an alpha channel so you
have to use CG and the last thing is it
can have nasty effects on classic
windows classic windows are what we term
non retained there is no back buffer for
them if something obscures it it will
actually tend to erase itself so you may
have noticed that if you're dragging
something from the finer and you go over
a classic window you actually watch the
classic window get a race and then it
kind of updates itself as it goes along
overlay windows will actually have the
same effect so they need to be careful
with them
one thing that we've added is the
concept of automatic window positioning
whenever the monitor size changes or a
monitor size changes or maybe the doc
appears because you have it done you
know you turn it on so you want it to
show up or you've resized the dock we
will actually go and move windows around
if their title bars have become obscured
now sometimes you don't want that to
happen and you can actually override
that we send out a que event window
constrain event to all windows when
we're about to do this and you can
intercept that event by installing a
carbon event handler on the window and
just return no we're saying oh no don't
do anything
you know I handle this even though you
really didn't do anything and with the
advent of the dock it's a little tougher
to actually find out where you can put
your windows it used to be if you were
on the main monitor you say alright I'll
subtract out the menu bar height from
the top but now we have this dock how
big is that how do I you know how do I
subtract this height where do I get the
dock rectangle well you can't but what
you can do is call get available window
positioning bounce this is a new API
that we've added for any monitor for any
G device that you hand it it will hand
you back a rectangle which is the legal
space that a window can live in so it's
important to start using that some of
the API is that we have actually already
take the dock into consideration so for
example resize window or zoom window so
you don't need to deal with in that
situation will automatically handle it
for you the window menu is something new
and it's completely supported by the
toolbox it automatically tracks document
class windows and you add it to you menu
bar by calling create standard window
menu and hands you back a menu you then
take the menu and insert it into menu
bar yourself the reason that we don't
insert it for you is you might have
different requirements for where it
lives
with with your particular menu bar all
the menu items in it in the standard
menu are handled automatically by the
toolbox but you can actually add items
to this menu and not affect the menu
adversely we drive it completely by menu
commands so as long as you don't steal
our commands you know we'll just handle
it for you so you can add your own
commands to growing you know maybe you
want to add a menu item to do like
tiling or stacking or whatever you want
another thing that we've added though is
this concept of alternate titles we have
API to set a windows alternate title and
what we use this for we use it for like
three things the first is we will show
it in the window menu the second thing
we'll use it for is when you minimize a
window its alternate title will show up
when you roll over it with the mouse on
in the dock and the third place you'll
see it is actually the dock pop-up when
it shows the window list the reason for
this particular alternate title concept
is that you may have windows in your
application that all have the actual
same title but maybe they're showing
different animal parts of the file
system or whatever it is you can
actually leave the window titles alone
but specify an alternate title and
that's what will show up in the window
menu certainly when you're looking at a
window you can pretty much tell oh this
is for that you know I'm looking at you
know whatever part of the file system
where that part file system or whatever
the case might be but if you're looking
in the window menu there's no way to
just you know discriminate between the
two or between all of your windows so
alternate titles allow you to specify a
different titles
so we have a lot of default behavior in
the toolbox and we don't allow you to
patch these days but we do have carbon
events so you can actually customize the
window manager to you into whatever
needs you know to your own desire by
doing by installing carbon event
handlers and there are if you look at
carbon events now th there are a lot of
events that we send out for windows I
wanted to point out some of the more
common ones that you would tend to
override the first is K event window
bounce change whenever you are dragging
a window or resizing the window we will
send out K event window bounds change
and that should actually be changing but
little typo there and you can actually
use this to do window gridding snap to
behavior we can have pallet snap
together or to the edges of the screen
that would be the most common use for
that the next one is K event window get
click activation this allows you to do
click through whenever the toolbox
detects it click on a window that is not
the front window not the active window
in your application we will send this
event to it asking it what should we do
how do you want to handle this we just
got to click should we bring you forward
or not and there are a couple of results
that you can return but to do click
through you would basically say don't
activate me but I do want to handle the
click and this is how you can accomplish
background dragging so dragging from a
window that's in the background onto
some window that's in the foreground
without that window coming forward first
the next event is K event window handle
content click if you're using the
standard window handler this is the way
you would in to intercept clicks on your
own custom content this is essentially
what it does is it represents a click
that is not in any toolbox entity that
we know of it's in effectively some
other region of the window so if you
have like custom views but you have
standard controls but standard controls
would actually be handle by the toolbox
but you can handle your custom views
just by intercepting this event and it's
effectively a mouse down event it has
all the same parameters
now the toolbox as I said has a lot of
default behaviors and for example we
will actually zoom windows for you when
we do that we need to know information
like what is the ideal size of the
window so when a zoom is detected we
were about to do a zoom we will actually
send the window a Kate event window get
ideal size event in response to that
your applications to say oh I should be
so big store that back into the event
and then the tool box can do the right
thing
likewise for a resize window while we
were when we were about to resize we
will send out a key event window get
minimum and get maximum size you just
tell us what those constraints are and
we'll do the right thing with it this
next slide is about a feature that we're
going to attempt to turn on in the next
major release Mac OS 10 the reason that
I'm bringing it up though is because I
want to kind of get you ready for it
server side window dragging what that
means is that the window servers in
control of dragging the windows around
Coco already does this we're going to
turn this on in carbon the advantages
are first that we don't actually have to
keep talking to the windows server so
right now what happens is we get a mouse
move we're tracking a window anyway say
okay move the window we tell the window
server
move the window it sends us another
mouse to move event and we keep this
back-and-forth traffic as you're
dragging a window around it's kind of a
lot of crosstalk so we want to eliminate
that the next thing is that if your
application is just stopped dead
something's happen you're in a tight
loop or you just went away for a while
the user can still move the windows of
your application you don't have to be
actually handling that and this is kind
of useful at times
this also has an effect that it actually
makes your application seem much more
responsive
the reason is let's say your application
was swapped out cuz he got a lot of
applications open and we had to swap
your app out
click on it he needs to swap it back in
and normally we'd have to swap back in
all the code that had to deal with
dragging and all of that fun stuff
but because the Windows servers in
control we can actually start to drag
the window immediately so rather than
seeing a big delay before the windows
started to follow the mouse the window
would actually start moving immediately
and this has a profound impact on the
user because they feel like they're in
control you know the system is keeping
up with them and it's rather important
now the reason that I'm talking about
this at all
is because it's going to require changes
to wdesk what we want to do is give a
window definition a coordinate system
that starts at zero zero not at the
global coordinates set the windows so if
you are writing W depths you will need
to be aware of this when this happens
now we're not going to break any
existing wdesk but it will mean that if
the W def does not support this
server-side dragon we can't turn it on
for your application now you're going to
have to turn this on manually if you're
doing the window dragon yourself if you
are using the standard window handler
this will be turned on for free again
provided that your the WF supports it
custom W deaths still supported for any
W deaf that we need to reference in a
resource like a wind resource you can
register the resource ID with the tool
box along with the proc pointer which
implements the DEF proc with register
window definition if you happen to have
where you happen to start writing a
carbon event based def proc you would
use register toolbox object and then you
just use create custom window in your
custom window runs and it's all good now
I'd like to do is show you a little bit
about the stuff that we just talked
about and to do that I like to bring up
guy full it in but I do have to remind
ads that I won the last game last night
so not always a target first anymore I
want to show you guys has to do with
window groups when possible you might
have four window groups is if you have
just a window that happens to split to
display little sub windows for editing
purposes like let's say this is a very
very primitive mail application that
needs a way to add an address and add a
name to an address book and it happens
to pop up a little sub window here which
is implemented as another window manager
window now you can type in there and all
but with window groups we actually allow
you to tie those two windows together so
that you can drag them around together
and have them z-order get together
properly and another cool thing about
window groups is they're totally
arbitrary you can set up whatever groups
you like and you can include or remove
windows from them as you wish so I've
got these four windows that as you saw
just then as I was clicking on each of
them they activated separately now that
I have them all grouped together they
activate together just as you would
expect and you can drag them together
just as you would expect and they
minimize together just as you would
expect
[Applause]
so the next thing I want to show you is
some of the overlay windows support one
things you might one thing you might
want to do with overlay windows is give
the user a way to sort of draw on
arbitrary parts of the screen so this
event horizon application has overlay
support built into it and I just turned
on the overlay window for this app so I
can start to scribble wherever I want
over the screen like it scribble over
the dock I can scribble over finder
icons do whatever I want you could even
use it as sort of a primitive coach
marking mechanism if you wanted to oh we
might have just gotten ourselves in
trouble well I guess that would be me
too got in trouble I don't know okay it
worked up let's close that window now
another use for overlay windows might be
if you're an alien race that wants to
invade the planet and you need to throw
a message up on somebody's screen you
could also do that just a shot
so one of the other things I'd mentioned
is we've been working on transparent
sheets support for carbon and what I'm
running here isn't exactly Mac OS 10 GM
we've got some bleeding edge pieces in
there and I want to show you the
progress we've been making this
application is simpler text I showed
this off yesterday it's just a
replacement for simple text and it uses
the standard nav services save don't
save dialog but on the system we've
enabled transparent sheets so if I try
to close the window you can see that the
sheet really is transparent uses all the
standard control manager controls and it
just works when we turn that on now I
showed it's I showed this app yesterday
this is live buttons the cool thing
about this actually has to do with the
fact that we install Carbon event
handlers to allow you to manipulate an
otherwise static user interface and what
we were writing this application it
brought to the forefront one of the
really major problems with the Control
Manager and that is that if you have
peer controls that happen to overlap you
get let's do this too you get some
really strange behaviors with the
interface where whatever control you
happen to click on last is what sort of
owns the draw area and you get really
ugly looking graphics and in fact let's
say you try to throw a picture into the
background of that window not only do
you get the the normal compositing issue
you might expect but as soon as the
picture tries to draw it totally
obliterates all the rest of the controls
well the coolest bit about the support
we did for transparent sheets is that it
enables us to allow proper control
compositing so we can draw layered
controls just as you would expect you
can click on controls and they will
highlight in the proper peer order this
picture happens to be behind other
controls so when I click on it oh you
know what I'm clicking on text at that
point if I click on it over here you can
see that just the picture highlights
none of the other controls highlight all
the animation just works you still have
a spinning progress their arrows drawing
on top of the ok button so this is
something that you can look forward to
in a future release of Mac OS 10 and now
I'm gonna send it back to Ed to talk a
little bit about the menu manager all
right
[Applause]
so obviously the first bit of that that
you'll see would be two transparent
sheets and later on and we'll actually
make that a general-purpose thing that
anybody can use so the menu manager made
quite a few changes to the menu manager
as well first you can have icons for
menu titles you know yes believe it next
thing is we support invitation and menu
section support a good example of this
is the recent items menu which is under
the Apple menu in mechanist and you can
actually do this we support it fully in
them in the menu manager you don't have
to write a custom em death we have much
better command ID access so command IDs
are a way to identify a menu item which
is a position independent method of
doing so and that's great
but you actually want to manipulate
those menu items using the command ID as
well and we have full support for doing
so with carbon we support ref counting
dynamic items this would be if you have
a particular menu accelerator in your in
a menu and you want it to actually
change the text depending on what
modifier keys it down we support that we
actually have and we also have much
better hierarchical support historically
what you've done is you insert your menu
your hierarchical menu into the
hierarchical menu list using you know
insert menu negative one and then you
reference that by putting the ID of that
menu into the actual parent item well
we've come up with a slightly better way
which is you just take the menu ref and
you've set it on the parent item and
you've done you want to play those games
anymore we also support certain carbon
events the first is begin and then
tracking whenever the mouse goes down in
the menu bar and we were about to call
or basically when many selectors called
what it comes down to when we start menu
select we send out begin tracking when
we end menu selector we call end
tracking and we send that event out
and this might be useful if you have
timers which are firing but you don't
want them to fire while the menus are
down you can actually disable them by
looking for this this notification we
also have a really cool event called
cave event menu opening and you can do
this for lazy construction of menus
let's say you had a hierarchical menu
and it showed part of the file system or
something you don't necessarily want to
populate it you know all up at once that
might be kind of intensive so what you
can do is wait from K event menu opening
and then go out to the file system fill
in the menu and then it will be display
with those contents and lastly we have
what is the direct replacement for the
menu hook function K event menu target
item so whenever you are rolling over an
item will send this event out and you
can use that notification to maybe put
up some contextual help or whatever you
need to do the menu manager truly
supports Carbon events and it supports
commands like I said we have much better
command ID support part of that involves
dealing with enabling and disabling menu
items whenever a menu is about to be
shown for every item in the menu we send
out K event command update status events
that's your time to say update the text
add a check mark whatever you want to do
now like I said we do that for every
item in the menu so that could
potentially be a lot of different update
status commands that we're sending
around your application might want to do
it all at once and you can do that by
intercepting the K event menu enable
items event in fact the default toolbox
response to an unhandled enable items
event is to send out update status for
every for every item in the menu so
maybe your application architecture only
works based on a per menu enabling
strategy so that's the event that you
would tap in for that
it's actually important that wait next
event based apps respond to these events
as well as pure carbon event based apps
and the reason is that if you happen to
have event handlers in your application
they will be they will be called while
you were inside wait next event
typically what would happen in the past
is you exit from wait next event find
out you had a keyboard event or maybe a
mouse event that happened to be in a
menu bar and then you would go and
update the status of your menu items
well because we're dispatching this
inside of the way next event you don't
necessarily get that chance so it might
be that it usually hits a command key
that item is enabled currently in the
menu bar we will actually go and call a
command handler for that might not even
be the effect that you want because it
might actually be the quick command so
your application may end up getting a
quit apple event and you didn't expect
it to so in those cases you need to make
sure that you're dealing with enabling
and disabling the items appropriately
back in Mac OS traditional Mac OS we
dealt with the Edit menu in a very
interesting manner basically we had this
thing which kind of looked for any
window as they were coming up it was
like a JG any filter and we'd see a new
window and go oh new window is it a
dialog and we say oh yeah it's a dialog
and is there add edit text field ago yes
oh good great then let's deal with the
Edit menu where is it oh I don't know go
scan the menu bar for anything with a
you know an X or a V next to it and
we'll what that must be the yet menu
that has some negative connotations in
that it first off it pulls like crazy
and we don't want to do that Mac os10
second office just bad code we don't
want that so we already have this
mechanism which was the command ID
mechanism it's the right mechanism so
it's actually important that for your
edit menus in carbene you use the
standard command IDs that we've put into
carmen advantage it doesn't hurt
anything if you're not using the command
for your application at all it doesn't
hurt you but it allows us to at least
find them in the menu bar and this is
important particularly when we put up
dialogues because the dialogue manager
still wants to deal with the Edit menu
appropriately and actually it's not even
the dialogue manager these days it's the
individual edit text controls because
they are the focus they get to control
the Edit menu appropriately and lastly
it's important to note that these update
status commands can actually be sent out
at any time it's not just oh there was a
key down or there was a mouse down in
the menu bar it might have been some
programmatic change of the window
ordering or something
maybe somebody calls select window like
the tool box when that happens if you
had a focused edit text control which
was owning the edit menu and now you're
in a window which has no focus the Edit
menu should actually be disabled so the
tool box will actually in that case
detect oh I need to you know the focus
has changed I need to go and dirty the
menu bar so when it sees that it's dirty
he will actually send out these process
I mean these update status commands so
be aware that they could be flying at
you at any time the Apple and
application menus are one in the same on
Mac OS 9 but they're different on Mac OS
10 the Apple menu just exists on Mac OS
10 it's always there
omnipresent staring at you watching you
but the Apple menu on Mac OS 9 is the
Apple menu that you always knew while on
Mac OS 10 it becomes what we termed the
application menu it's the menu with the
name of your application you should
continue to insert your Apple menu into
the menu bar just like you always have
basically it's the placeholder it's a
place that you put your about item and
whatever other items that you've
historically put there so you want to
keep doing that and like I said on nine
it just is the Apple menu like like you
always knew it and on 10 it's the
application menu most of the items in
these menus are handled automatically
the exceptions are really quit
and preferences these are commands that
you need to deal with obviously if the
user selects command Q they want to quit
your app you should probably respond and
quit being so stubborn for preferences
you know the user wants to change some
aspect of your application the way it
works or whatever you need to respond to
that by default the Preferences item is
disabled so it's actually up to your
application to enable it and you can do
it by command ID we supply the command
ID and carbon of NSH and you can also
enable and disable the quit menu item
however you need to be a command ID as
well
now don't let the first bullet scare you
I mean we don't by default have a help
menu there however if you call HM get
help menu we will automatically insert
one if your application happens to
specify a help book in your info dot P
list we will all and we will
automatically create to help menu for
you as well as in the past you can just
add menu items as you see fit to this
menu for any menu items that you add you
will get the commands for them you can
just install a command handler for any
items that the system has installed will
handle them automatically well that was
short that's because they drop a couple
of my slides out either that or I talk
too fast
so the bottom line here is we've done a
lot of work in the menu manager we've
done a lot of work in the window manager
the window manager just think about it I
mean we've taken it from a system where
everything was you know non retained we
had to deal with damage repair ourselves
all of these other things to a system
where we actually have you know window
buffering which was the slide that was
missing by the way and I mean we've just
added window groups we have overlay
windows and the window manager is
actually in such a state these days that
we can start adding new window classes
at a very fast pace the entire code base
of the high-level tool
is in great shape these days and we're
making constant improvements and
especially with the advent of carbon
events with you know mixing in with that
we can actually just start going wild
now so now it's time that's really
getting exciting
should look at carbon events that H as
always if you're looking to override a
lot of the window behaviors many
behaviors and it's important to go and
port your application that's why you're
here you're trying to learn about Mac
os10 we're trying to tell you all we can
try to help you along so that I'd like
to bring mark Turner back out and take
you through roadmap and then we'll do
Q&A thanks Thank You ed so coming up
tomorrow morning we have controls and
appearance 1 & 2 back to back hope you
can make those 2 and then carbon
performance tuning at 2 p.m. that's
gonna be a great one for learning about
the different performance
characteristics of your api's as you run
on Mac OS 10 vs Mac OS 9 and this is me
my job is to help you adopt carbon and
get your apps to Mac OS 10 so if you
have questions either today or after
WWDC email me
you